Despite the arguably dated appearance, difficult learning curve and practical
non-existence in the modern personal computing space, Command Line Interfaces
(CLIs) have more than stood the test of time in the software development world.
There are a multitude of extremely popular tools and applications that
primarily focus on the command line as an interaction medium. Some examples
include version control software like git, compilers and interpreters for
programming languages, package managers and various core utilities that are
popular in areas such as software development, scripting and system
administration. Command line interfaces are also utilised in areas outside of
software development. For example the infamous Bloomberg Terminal in the
financial sector and for general computing purposes such as email
mutt, neomutt and text editing Vim, Neovim, Wordstar, etc.. . 

As previously mentioned, the use of the command line as an interaction paradigm has
effectively disappeared from a mainstream personal computer usage perspective.
This reality contributes greatly to the intimidation factor and learning difficulty for
those interested in getting into software engineering or system administration.
This unfamiliarity, paired with the inevitability of usage of CLIs in the
development space highlights a need to make the command line more accessible to
new users for whom text-based interaction with their computer is an alien
concept. In recent years interactive learning utilising tools such as sandboxed
environments have been gaining in popularity and have the potential to be a
suitable medium for learning command line basics through actual usage, examples
and practice.

In this work, we have created just such an interactive tutoring tool tailored
for the command line. CLI-Tutor is a forgiving CLI application that aims to
teach topics such as shell basics and Unix-like core utility usage through the
use of guided lessons with interactive examples and feedback at the command
line.


Trotz des wohl veralteten Aussehens, schwierige Lernkurve und praktisch
Nichtexistenz im allgemeinen Personal-Computing-Bereich,
Befehlszeilenschnittstellen (CLIs) haben sich in der Welt der
Softwareentwicklung mehr als bewährt. Es gibt eine Vielzahl äußerst beliebter
Tools und Anwendungen, die konzentrieren sich in erster Linie auf die CLI als
Interaktionsmedium. Einige Beispiele enthalten Versionskontrollsoftware wie
`git', Compiler und Interpreter für Programmiersprachen, Paketmanager und
verschiedene Kerndienstprogramme beliebt in Bereichen wie Softwareentwicklung,
Scripting und System Verwaltung.

Wie bereits erwähnt, hat die Verwendung der Befehlszeile als
Interaktionsparadigma praktisch aus der Perspektive der Mainstream-PC-Nutzung
verschwunden. Dies trägt stark zum Einschüchterungsfaktor und zur
Lernschwierigkeit bei die daran interessiert sind, in die Softwareentwicklung
oder Systemadministration einzusteigen. Diese Ungewohntheit, gepaart mit der
Zwangsläufigkeit der Nutzung von CLIs im Der Entwicklungsbereich unterstreicht
die Notwendigkeit, die Befehlszeile zugänglicher zu machen neue Benutzer, für
die die textbasierte Interaktion mit ihrem Computer ein Fremdwort ist Konzept.
In den letzten Jahren interaktives Lernen unter Verwendung von Tools wie
Sandboxed Umgebungen erfreuen sich zunehmender Beliebtheit und haben das
Potenzial, a geeignetes Medium zum Erlernen der CLI durch praktische Anwendung,
Beispiele und üben.
